Build notes
===========


## libuv

The contents of the libuv/ directory are the canonical libuv sources, with changes as described below.

### Step-by-step instructions

To update libuv to a new version, do the following:

* Edit `tools/update_libuv.R` so that `version` is the new version number, then add it to git.

    ```
    git add tools/update_libuv.R
    ```

* Run that script, then do a `git add src/libuv`.

    ```
    tools/update_libuv.R
    git add src/libuv
    ```

* On Linux or Mac, run libuv's `autogen.sh`, and commit the files.

    ```
    cd src/libuv
    ./autogen.sh
    mv m4/lt~obsolete.m4 m4/lt_obsolete.m4

    # Add these generated files. -f is needed because they are listed in src/libuv/.gitignore.
    git add -f Makefile.in
    git add -f aclocal.m4
    git add -f ar-lib
    git add -f compile
    git add -f config.guess
    git add -f config.sub
    git add -f configure
    git add -f depcomp
    git add -f install-sh
    git add -f ltmain.sh
    git add -f m4/libtool.m4
    git add -f m4/libuv-extra-automake-flags.m4
    git add -f m4/lt_obsolete.m4
    git add -f m4/ltoptions.m4
    git add -f m4/ltsugar.m4
    git add -f m4/ltversion.m4
    git add -f missing

    git commit -m "Update to libuv [VERSION]"
    ```

* Cherry-pick some fixes:

    ```
    # Fixes for unnamed structs on MinGW
    git cherry-pick 7106577
    git cherry-pick 4bea58e
    # Fix for empty translation unit warning on Windows with -pedantic
    git cherry-pick 8ab31ef
    # Fix for Solaris
    git cherry-pick 1898a29
    # Workaround for pragma NOTE
    git cherry-pick 421f092
    ```

* If the cherry-picked commits needed any modification, update this README to refer to the new cherry-picked commits, then commit.

* Check for any C files that have a "#pragma" with "diagnostic ignored". If any are found, replace `#pragma` with `# pragma` and add it to the set of commits to cherry-pick.

    ```
    find src/ -name "*.c" -exec grep -ri "#pragma.*diagnostic ignored" {} \;
    ```

### Details

#### Makefile-libuv.mingw

Prior to libuv 1.21.0, it included a Makefile.mingw, for use on MinGW platforms like the one that R uses in Windows. As of libuv 1.21.0, the Makefile.mingw was removed, and the recommended build method on MinGW is to use the configure script. However, the configure script will not run from  `R CMD INSTALL`, because it will try to execute the configure script using cmd.exe, and it will not even be able to find basic things like /bin/sh.

Because it's not possible to run the configure script from `R CMD INSTALL`, httpuv includes a custom Makefile for libuv. The original version of this resides at tools/Makefile-libuv.mingw, and when the `tools/update_libuv.R` script is run, it copies it to src/libuv/Makefile-libuv.mingw.


#### MinGW and unnamed structs

The libuv sources contain unnamed structs, which result in warnings on MinGW's GCC. This in turn causes WARNINGS in R CMD check on Windows. They were converted to named structs.

#### Empty translation unit

When libuv/src/win/snprintf.c is compiled, the entire content of the file is `#ifdef`-ed out, so the result is empty. When compiled with the `-pedantic` flag, as is done on CRAN's win-builder service (and probably the CRAN build machine), this results in a significant warning.

The workaround just adds a dummy `typedef` statement to suppress the warning.

#### Solaris support

The Makefile.am file is modified for Solaris support. This is the original line:

```
libuv_la_CFLAGS += -D__EXTENSIONS__ -D_XOPEN_SOURCE=500
```

It has `-DSUNOS_NO_IFADDRS` added to it. See [here](https://github.com/libuv/libuv/issues/1458) for more information.

```
libuv_la_CFLAGS += -D__EXTENSIONS__ -D_XOPEN_SOURCE=500 -DSUNOS_NO_IFADDRS
```

#### C-style comments

In src/libuv/include/uv.h, the original file has some C++-style comments, but this raises a significant warning for `R CMD check` on r-devel-linux-x86_64-debian-gcc (as of 2020-05-15). The fix is to replace with C-style comments.


#### Run `autogen.sh`

After modifying Makefile.am, run `./autogen.sh`. This requires automake and libtool, and generates the `configure` script, along with a number of other related files. These generated files are checked into the repository so that other systems to not need automake and libtool to build libuv.

The file `libuv/m4/lt~obsolete.m4` (generated by autogen.sh) is renamed to `lt_obsolete.m4` because the filename with the `~` causes problems with `R CMD check`. In the Makevars file, it gets copied to `lt~obsolete.m4` so that it's present during the build process.

In Makevars, before running `./configure`, it updates the timestamps output files `aclocal.m4`, `Makefile.in`, and `configure`, to make sure they are newer than the input files. Note that order matters: `aclocal.m4` must not be newer than the other files. On some platforms (like Solaris), the order in which the files are specified can matter. In our case, we touched `aclocal.m4`, and copied its date to the other files.

If this is not done, then the `configure` script may generate a Makefile which tries to find `aclocal-1.15` and other autotools-related programs ([#124](https://github.com/rstudio/httpuv/issues/124)). See this [SO question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/33278928/how-to-overcome-aclocal-1-15-is-missing-on-your-system-warning-when-compilin) for more information.

The following generated files are checked into the repository:

```
src/libuv/Makefile.in
src/libuv/aclocal.m4
src/libuv/ar-lib
src/libuv/compile
src/libuv/config.guess
src/libuv/config.sub
src/libuv/configure
src/libuv/depcomp
src/libuv/install-sh
src/libuv/ltmain.sh
src/libuv/m4/libtool.m4
src/libuv/m4/libuv-extra-automake-flags.m4
src/libuv/m4/lt_obsolete.m4    * NOTE: this was renamed
src/libuv/m4/ltoptions.m4
src/libuv/m4/ltsugar.m4
src/libuv/m4/ltversion.m4
src/libuv/missing
```
